Rationale for Design Decisions 

Our team decided to use the Yelp dataset in order to ask the question: How do popular businesses (hot spots) impact nearby businesses of the same category? 

In order to answer this question, we thoroughly looked through the dataset to identify popular business categories (Restaurants, Shopping, etc.), and we narrowed down our choice of cities to visualize. Originally, we wanted to choose the cities that had the most data (based on number businesses and reviews each of those businesses received). However, we quickly realized in our data mining process, that if we were to choose the largest city, we would end up with tons of data (files exceeding 100 mb) that we would be unable to upload to GitHub. Thus, we decided to split the data based on city, business category, and radius (containing neighbors of each business at distances 1, 2, 3...7 mi). 

Once we had our data filtered, we wanted to encourage the user to explore the data. To do this, we start off with a main map of the U.S., which contains 3 red circles each indicating a city. Upon hovering on these red circles, the circles increase in size, decrease in opacity, and a label with the city name appears on the screen, making it visually clear what city you’re viewing. When a user clicks on a city, they are led to a page where they can view all businesses of a certain category (Home Services, Shopping, and Restaurants). We included a dropdown for the user, so they can easily view the businesses they’d like. 

In terms of the way the map is encoded, we originally were using Google Maps, but decided to pivot to Leaflet instead. Google Maps ended up providing too detailed of a background map that it made any data we overlaid on the map even more cluttered. Even worse, some of the businesses we overlaid on the map already existed within Google Maps, so the user would be seeing two different visual encodings for the same business. When pivoting to Leaflet, we decided to use the grayed out version of the map as it was less visually distracting and we wanted our markers (representing businesses) to pop out on the map both in size and color. We colored our markers according to ratings of the business, and utilized the traditional 5 star color rating scale, so that users could easily spot a high or low rated business at a glance. For labeling each business, we decided to use a hover approach rather than a pinned approach to avoid cluttering of text. 

Additional functionality in the map includes clicking on a business. Doing so centers the business on the map and generates a colored radius (which the user can control) to easily see what businesses are direct neighbors of the selected business. Playing around with the business category dropdown and the radius dynamically alters the summary at the bottom of the page, which generates an average rating of neighboring businesses in the vicinity the user has chosen. We believed adding a summary statement would tie together elements on the screen in a concise, readable format for the user to digest.

Overview of Development Process 

Our team would set up meetings about 4-5 times per week leading up to the project. During each meeting, we would discuss project updates and tasks that still needed to be completed. Our full list of tasks was written in a shared Google Doc, and each time we’d complete a task, we’d update it on the doc. We also had a group chat to maintain communication. 

About a third of the way into the project, we started delegating more concrete tasks in the visualization. Renbin handled the data mining process and generated all the pre-processed data for the visualization. Meryl designed the first web page displaying the entirety of the US. Stuti designed the second web page displaying individual city maps by business category. As more tasks accumulated in each member’s task lists, other members would help out. (For example, Meryl helped implement the radius functionality on the second web page). 

Building this visualization took somewhere between 50-60 hours total amongst the 3 of us. We spent a lot of time filtering the data appropriately, especially when finding out about the limitations for file size. We also spent a lot of time designing the city by category map since that was the page with the most user control and actions (the page designed for the actual data exploration). 
